---
layout: post
title: matconv v0.1.0 Released
author: Siddarta Jairam
tags: R MatLab
comments: true
---
I have released a matLab / Octave code translator on my github page,
[here](https://github.com/sidjai/matconv). Engineering seems to be an
untapped market for R. Experiments across disciplines require similar
data transformations but MatLab often pushes groups against sharing
code. One reason many groups choose to forgo a switch in programming
languages is that there is a large code base that would need to be
converted which is tedious at best and fatally time consuming at worst.

This program tries to alleviate this reason with a translator that can
be molded to a project's needs. I am actually doing this to convert one
of my own projects over from MatLab to R so it at least has to have
enough options for a project that spanned multiple years and a variety
of MatLab-thonic features. Right now, it just does the base syntax
conversion. The base functions and the data structures will be converted
using supplied converting functions to a wrapper function that already
does the basic syntax. Below is a summary of the features of the present
version does.

Basic calls
-----------

The first thing that the translator does is go through the program and
convert the basic syntax from MatLab to R. This includes the following:

1.  Changing symbols around ('~' to '!', 'end' to '}')
2.  Get rid of the semicolons at the end of the line
3.  Change the assignment symbol from '=' to '<-'

This is done with simple 'gsub' calls and examples are shown below.

<table>
<tr>
<th>
matCode
</th>
<th>
rCode
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
thing = 5 * 3;
</td>
<td>
thing <- 5 * 3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
thing2 = (thing ~= 14);
</td>
<td>
thing2 <- (thing != 14)
</td>
</tr>
</table>
 

Flow Control
------------

Next it goes through all the different flow control blocks and converts
them to the R equivalent. The converted blocks are as follows.

1.  if
2.  if else
3.  for
4.  while

Switch statements will be included in a future version as R does not
really have a true switch / case type block. The 'switch' function is
helpful in a lot of situations but the usage is different from how other
languages do switch blocks. Below are some examples of how its used for
the other blocks.

<table>
<tr>
<th>
matCode
</th>
<th>
rCode
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
if argLen == 1
</td>
<td>
if (argLen == 1){
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  doThing = 9999;
</td>
<td>
  doThing <- 9999
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
else
</td>
<td>
} else {
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  doThing = 1;
</td>
<td>
  doThing <- 1
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
end
</td>
<td>
}
</td>
</tr>
</table>
 

User functions
--------------

In matlab there is a distinction between script files and function
files. If a function file is supplied (first word is "function") than
the function definitions will be changed with some of syntax.

The returned objects are gathered and put in a 'return' statement at the
end of the function. If there is more than one return statement a list
of those objects are returned. Default inputs or an unknown length of
inputs into a matLab function is handled using a protected word
'varargin'. The closest R equivalent is '...' which will be turned into
a list as the variable 'varargin' in the R version. There is a whole
family of input and output handlers in matLab but this is the most
useful in my eyes so I gave it higher priority. Examples of this type of
conversion is shown below.

<table>
<tr>
<th>
matCode
</th>
<th>
rCode
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
function [ dat ] = xlsReadPretty(varargin))
</td>
<td>
xlsReadPretty <- function(...){
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  didThing = 1*3;
</td>
<td>
 varargin <- list(...)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  dat = didThing / 3;
</td>
<td>
  didThing <- 1*3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
end
</td>
<td>
  dat <- didThing / 3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
 return(dat)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
}
</td>
</tr>
</table>
 

In another version, there could be options to make this conversion more
integrated with the rest of the code or specifying another return class
other than 'list'. This is a precursour to the function converters by
adding these user functions into the dictionary of MatLab base functions
to R base functions.

*rmarkdown files for this post can be found at: https://github.com/sidjai.github.io/_drafts/matconv010.rmd*
